Tn monolith to federation (#201)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0013-monolith-to-federation.mdx

---
title: GraphQL monolith to Apollo Federation
id: TN0013
description: Strategies for migrating from a GraphQL monolith to multiple subgraphs with Apollo Federation
tags: [federation, server]
---

As with any monolithic service, teams may struggle to change and maintain their GraphQL API as it grows larger and receives contributions from more developers.

> Breaking up the monolith into smaller GraphQL APIs may be the right strategy for your team. With Apollo Federation, you can break up a monolith without sacrificing the unified API that your client applications depend on. Each "subgraph" can be independently updated, deployed, and scaled while contributing to the same unified schema.

Reviewer: Why should they break it up?

Author: open to suggestions here. i didn't want to spend too much time on the intro, and i though that
> Each "subgraph" can be independently updated, deployed, and scaled while contributing to the same unified schema.
was a good explanation of the benefits

Here are the steps we recommend to convert a monolithic GraphQL API into a federated GraphQL API.

> ## 1. Put a GraphQL Router in front of your existing API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Put an Apollo Router in front of your existing API
```

Start the process by making a "federated graph of one". Your existing monolith can act as a subgraph without any schema changes:

1. Publish your monolith schema to Apollo Studio as a subgraph.

   ```sh
   rover subgraph publish --name monolith \
     --schema ./schema.graphql \
     --routing-url http://monolith.prod.svc.cluster.local/graphql
   ```

2. Deploy Apollo Router.

> 3. Use ingress routing rules redirect client request to Apollo Router instead of your monolith.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use ingress routing rules to redirect client request to Apollo Router instead of your monolith.
```

4. Enable usage metrics reporting to Apollo Studio.
5. Add [subgraph checks](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/schema-checks/) to your monolith's CI pipeline.

At this point, client requests go to your new Apollo Router instead of the monolith, but it's serving the same schema so they won't know the difference.

Not only are you prepared to federate your schema, you now have field-level visibility into graph usage and breaking change detection.

## 2. Identify entities

> Look through all the types in your schema and identify candidates for entities. These are types that form the foundation of your data model. They must have attributes that uniquely identify them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by looking through all the types in your schema and identify possible candidates for entities. Entities are types that form the foundation of your data model, and they must have attributes that uniquely identify them.
```

This feels a bit clunky, but not sure how to improve it.

  account: Account
  flights: [Flight]
  hotels: [Hotel]
}

type Room {
  number: ID!
  floor: Int
  hotel: Hotel
}

type Seat {
  number: ID!
  airplane: Airplane
}

type User {
  id: ID!
  account: Account
  username: String
  reservations: [Reservation]
}

type Query {
  me: User
  searchHotels(input: SearchHotelInput!): [Hotel]
  searchFlights(input: SearchFlightInput!): [Flight]
}
```

</ExpansionPanel>

Types such as `User`, `Reservation`, `Flight`, and `Hotel` are uniquely identifiable, while `Profile`, ` CancellationPolicy`, and `Amenity` are more like groups of attributes attached to those entities.

## 3. Group entities

Group entities by logical domain or concern. These are usually product boundaries but may also be team boundaries. This is how you'll determine how many subgraphs you'll end up with.

| Accounts domain | Flights domain | Hotels domain |
| --------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| Account         | Airplane       | Bed           |
| User            | Airline        | Hotel         |
|                 | Flight         | Reservation   |
|                 | Reservation    | Room          |
|                 | Seat           |               |

> ## 4. Rank entities by ease of migration

Reviewer: Might also add that this should be a planning phase for the plan of the attack to tackle the migration. 

I might just be tired- but read this as if I'm mid-migration.

Author: i could split the doc into Planning and Implementation and have 4 steps in each!

When picking which types to migrate to subgraphs first, you could start anywhere. But you probably want to consider a few things first:

**How many related types will you have to bring over at the same time?**

Count the number of value types associated with an entity. You'll need to copy all of those types over to the subgraph when you migrate the entity. Entities with fewer related scalars, enums, and non-entity object types will be a bit easier to migrate.

You won't need to move related entities at the same time as long as you can return an "entity reference". For example, you can move the `Room` type if you have access to the `Hotel` foreign key:

```graphql
# hotels subgraph
type Room @key(fields: "number") {
  number: ID!
  floor: Int
  hotel: Hotel
}

type Hotel @key(fields: "id") {
  id: ID! # comes from rooms.hotel_id in the database
}
```

> It may be safer and easier to move the entire `Room` type but only a "stub" of the `Hotel` type. The query planner can fetch the rest of the `Hotel` fields from the monolith until you move that type as well.

Reviewer: Would it be worthwhile to discuss what this means in terms of the monolith? Specifically that it'll need to support a `referenceResolver` (or equivalent) to handle this reference.

Author: excellent point!

```graphql
query MyFlights {
  me {
    reservations {
      flights {
        ...FlightDetails
      }
    }
  }
}
```

might end up with an "A→B→A" query plan, fetching the `User`, then the `Reservation`, then the `Flight` in three separate subgraph fetches:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(monolith) --> B(subgraph)
    B --> C(monolith)
```

A better choice at this stage might be to move the `Flight` type so that the query plan is much more efficient, fetching the `User` and `Reservation` together before fetching the `Flight`:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(monolith) --> B(subgraph)
```

Root fields that fetch the migrated types to make the opposite query plan, such as `Query.flight(id:)`, are also good candidates for early migration. In this case the `Flight` is fetched first, and then any other data comes from the monolith.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(subgraph) --> B(monolith)
```

Complex query plans are inevitable during the migration, but by ranking entities and moving the easiest ones first, you may be able to avoid the worst of them.

## 5. Deploy your new subgraph

> Start with an empty subgraph to get the deploying and continuous integration pipelines set up. You can use this stub subgraph schema, which won't have an affect on the client-facing schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start with an empty subgraph to get the CI/CD pipelines set up. You can use this stub subgraph schema, which won't affect the client-facing schema.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if we should use CI/CD or the previous terms, but makes it concise.

Author: i try not to use "CD" because it's rare to see actual "continuous delivery" and i don't want to imply that CD is necessary for managed federation

Reviewer: 👍 makes sense!

```graphql
extend schema
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/federation/v2.0"
        import: ["@shareable" "@inaccessible"])

type Query {
  _todo: String @shareable @inaccessible
}
```

Once it's deployed, set up schema checks and publishes so that you can catch composition errors quickly and start contributing to the supergraph.

> ## 6. Move entities, related types, and relevant root fields

Reviewer: Might be worth a link back to the type migration guide, but also keeping the information here as well for posterity.

Author: link back up to a header in the doc? i'm not sure i follow

Reviewer: Basically somewhere in this section- just grabbed the first line in the section but it wasn't super clear. It's a good reference page in the future if they need to continue to do it.

---
title: GraphQL monolith to Apollo Federation
id: TN0013
description: Strategies for migrating from a GraphQL monolith to multiple subgraphs with Apollo Federation
tags: [federation, server]
---

As with any monolithic service, teams may struggle to change and maintain their GraphQL API as it grows larger and receives contributions from more developers.

Breaking up the monolith into smaller GraphQL APIs may be the right strategy for your team. With Apollo Federation, you can break up a monolith without sacrificing the unified API that your client applications depend on. Each "subgraph" can be independently updated, deployed, and scaled while contributing to the same unified schema.

Here are the steps we recommend to convert a monolithic GraphQL API into a federated GraphQL API.

## Planning & Preparation

### 1. Put Apollo Router in front of your existing API

Start the process by making a "federated graph of one". Your existing monolith can act as a subgraph without any schema changes:

> 1. Publish your monolith schema to Apollo Studio as a subgraph.

Reviewer 2: First step here should be `Create a new Federated graph in Apollo Studio`

```suggestion
1. Create a new Federated graph in Apollo Studio
2. Publish your monolith schema to Apollo Studio as a subgraph.
```

Reviewer 2: However if you have an exising monolith in Studio you can use the `--convert` flag to so maybe we need an second block: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/rover/commands/subgraphs#--convert

   ```sh
   rover subgraph publish --name monolith \
     --schema ./schema.graphql \
     --routing-url http://monolith.prod.svc.cluster.local/graphql
   ```

2. Deploy Apollo Router.

> 3. Use ingress routing rules to redirect client request to Apollo Router instead of your monolith.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Use internal routing rules to redirect client requests to Apollo Router instead of your monolith.
```

4. Enable usage metrics reporting to Apollo Studio.
5. Add [subgraph checks](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/schema-checks/) to your monolith's CI pipeline.

At this point, client requests go to your new Apollo Router instead of the monolith, but it's serving the same schema so they won't know the difference.

Not only are you prepared to federate your schema, you now have field-level visibility into graph usage and breaking change detection.

### 2. Identify entities

> Start by looking through all the types in your schema and identify possible entities. Entities are types that form the foundation of your data model, and they must have attributes that uniquely identify them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start by looking through all the types in your schema and identify possible [entities](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/entities/). Entities are types that form the foundation of your data model, and they must have attributes that uniquely identify them.
```

### 3. Group entities

Group entities by logical domain or concern. These are usually product boundaries but may also be team boundaries. This is how you'll determine how many subgraphs you'll end up with.

| Accounts domain | Flights domain | Hotels domain |
| --------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| Account         | Airplane       | Bed           |
| User            | Airline        | Hotel         |
|                 | Flight         | Reservation   |
|                 | Reservation    | Room          |
|                 | Seat           |               |

### 4. Rank entities by ease of migration

When picking which types to migrate to subgraphs first, you could start anywhere. But you probably want to consider a few things first:

**How many related types will you have to bring over at the same time?**

Count the number of value types associated with an entity. You'll need to copy all of those types over to the subgraph when you migrate the entity. Entities with fewer related scalars, enums, and non-entity object types will be a bit easier to migrate.

> You won't need to move related entities at the same time as long as you can return an "entity reference". For example, you can move the `Room` type if you have access to the `Hotel` foreign key:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You won't need to move related entities at the same time as long as you can return an [entity reference](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/entities/#referencing-an-entity-without-contributing-fields). For example, you can move the `Room` type if you have access to the `Hotel` foreign key:
```

```graphql
# hotels subgraph
type Room @key(fields: "number") {
  number: ID!
  floor: Int
  hotel: Hotel
}

> type Hotel @key(fields: "id") {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type Hotel @key(fields: "id", resolvable: false) {
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(monolith) --> B(subgraph)
```

Root fields that fetch the migrated types to make the opposite query plan, such as `Query.flight(id:)`, are also good candidates for early migration. In this case the `Flight` is fetched first, and then any other data comes from the monolith.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(subgraph) --> B(monolith)
```

Complex query plans are inevitable during the migration, but by ranking entities and moving the easiest ones first, you may be able to avoid the worst of them.

## Implementation

### 1. Make your monolith a real subgraph

Now that you have a migration plan, you can start making schema and code changes. The first change is to add the [Apollo Federation subgraph specification](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/federation-spec/) to the monolith. The steps involved depend on the [Apollo Federation-compatible library](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/supported-subgraphs/) for your monolith's language and framework.

> The most important functionality is defining entities and adding "reference resolvers". The documentation for [Apollo Server and `@apollo/gateway`](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/subgraphs#3-define-an-entity) is here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most important functionality is defining entities and adding [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/subgraphs#3-define-an-entity)
```

### 2. Deploy your new subgraph

Start with an empty subgraph to get the deploying and continuous integration pipelines set up. You can use this stub subgraph schema which won't affect the client-facing schema.

```graphql
extend schema
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/federation/v2.0"
        import: ["@shareable" "@inaccessible"])

type Query {
  _todo: String @shareable @inaccessible
}
```

Once it's deployed, set up schema checks and publishes so that you can catch composition errors quickly and start contributing to the supergraph.

### 3. Move an entity along with related types and relevant root fields

1. Start by marking all the value types (enums, non-entity object types) you're going to move to the subgraph as `@shareable` in the monolith.
2. Copy the types and fields over to the subgraph schema and port resolvers from the monolith.
3. Deploy the subgraph and test it by making calls to it directly. Use the `_entities` root field to test joins between entities.

Once you're satisfied with the behavior and performance of your new subgraph, you can start moving all traffic to it and cleaning up the monolith.

> 1. Mark fields in the subgraph with `@override(from: "monolith")`, telling the query planner to prefer the subgraph.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Use the [@override](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/federated-types/federated-directives/#override) directive to mark fields in the subgraph with `@override(from: "monolith")`, telling the query planner to prefer the new subgraph over the monolith.
```

---
title: GraphQL monolith to Apollo Federation
id: TN0013

> description: Strategies for migrating from a GraphQL monolith to multiple subgraphs with Apollo Federation

Reviewer 3: Nit: When I saw "strategies" I expected the TN to present a few options, eg. strangler pattern and something else (complete rewrite?).

Author: Changed to "steps".

## Implementation

### 1. Make your monolith a real subgraph

Now that you have a migration plan, you can start making schema and code changes. The first change is to add the [Apollo Federation subgraph specification](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/federation-spec/) to the monolith. The steps involved depend on the [Apollo Federation-compatible library](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/supported-subgraphs/) for your monolith's language and framework.

The most important functionality is defining entities and adding [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/subgraphs#3-define-an-entity).

### 2. Deploy your new subgraph

Start with an empty subgraph to get the deploying and continuous integration pipelines set up. You can use this stub subgraph schema which won't affect the client-facing schema.

```graphql
extend schema
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/federation/v2.0"
        import: ["@shareable" "@inaccessible"])

type Query {
  _todo: String @shareable @inaccessible
}
```

> Once it's deployed, set up schema checks and publishes so that you can catch composition errors quickly and start contributing to the supergraph.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once it's deployed, set up [schema checks and publishes](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/rover/commands/subgraphs#publishing-a-subgraph-schema-to-apollo-studio) so that you can catch composition errors quickly and start contributing to the supergraph.
```

**How complex will your query plans become during the migration?**

If you started by moving the `Reservation` type, which is deeply interconnected with other entities, a query that looks like this:

```graphql
query MyFlights {
  me {
    reservations {
      flights {
        ...FlightDetails
      }
    }
  }
}
```

might end up with an "A→B→A" query plan, fetching the `User`, then the `Reservation`, then the `Flight` in three separate subgraph fetches:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(monolith) --> B(subgraph)
    B --> C(monolith)
```

A better choice at this stage might be to move the `Flight` type so that the query plan is much more efficient, fetching the `User` and `Reservation` together before fetching the `Flight`:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(monolith) --> B(subgraph)
```

Root fields that fetch the migrated types to make the opposite query plan, such as `Query.flight(id:)`, are also good candidates for early migration. In this case, the query plan fetches the `Flight` first, and then it fetches any other data from the monolith.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A(subgraph) --> B(monolith)
```

> Complex query plans are inevitable during the migration, but by ranking entities and moving the easiest ones first, you may be able to avoid the worst of them.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Inevitably, some operation query plans become more complex while you're migrating types between subgraphs. By ranking your entities and moving the lowest-impact ones first, you can minimize this increase.
```

## Implementation

### 1. Make your monolith a real subgraph

> Now that you have a migration plan, you can start making schema and code changes. The first change is to add the [Apollo Federation subgraph specification](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/federation-spec/) to the monolith. The steps involved depend on the [Apollo Federation-compatible library](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/supported-subgraphs/) for your monolith's language and framework.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Now that you have a migration plan, you can start making schema and code changes. The first change is to add the [Apollo Federation subgraph specification](/federation/federation-spec/) to the monolith. The steps involved depend on which [Apollo-Federation-compatible library](/federation/supported-subgraphs/) you use with your monolith's language and framework.
```

> The most important functionality is defining entities and adding [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/subgraphs#3-define-an-entity).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The most important functionality to add is defining your entities and adding their [reference resolvers](/federation/subgraphs#3-define-an-entity).
```

### 2. Deploy your new subgraph

> Start with an empty subgraph to get the deploying and continuous integration pipelines set up. You can use this stub subgraph schema which won't affect the client-facing schema.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Start with an empty subgraph to most quickly set up your deployment and continuous integration pipelines. You can use this stub subgraph schema, which won't affect the client-facing schema:
```

```graphql
extend schema
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/federation/v2.0"
        import: ["@shareable" "@inaccessible"])

type Query {
  _todo: String @shareable @inaccessible
}
```

> Once it's deployed, set up [schema checks and publishes](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/rover/commands/subgraphs#publishing-a-subgraph-schema-to-apollo-studio) so that you can catch composition errors quickly and start contributing to the supergraph.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After your new subgraph is deployed, set up [schema checks and publishes](/rover/commands/subgraphs#publishing-a-subgraph-schema-to-apollo-studio) so that you can catch composition errors quickly and start contributing to the supergraph.
```

### 3. Move an entity along with related types and relevant root fields

1. Start by marking all the value types (enums, non-entity object types) you're going to move to the subgraph as `@shareable` in the monolith.

> 2. Copy the types and fields over to the subgraph schema and port resolvers from the monolith.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Copy the types and fields over to the subgraph schema and port their resolvers from the monolith.
```

3. Deploy the subgraph and test it by making calls to it directly. Use the `_entities` root field to test joins between entities.

> Once you're satisfied with the behavior and performance of your new subgraph, you can start moving all traffic to it and cleaning up the monolith.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When you're satisfied with the behavior and performance of your new subgraph, you can start moving all traffic to it and cleaning up the monolith.
```

> 1. Use the [@override](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/federated-types/federated-directives/#override) directive to mark fields in the subgraph with `@override(from: "monolith")`, telling the query planner to prefer the new subgraph over the monolith.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Use the [`@override`](/federation/federated-types/federated-directives/#override) directive to mark fields in the subgraph with `@override(from: "monolith")`, telling the query planner to prefer the new subgraph over the monolith.
```

Reviewer 5: Watch out, GitHub appears to be auto-formatting based on a GH username in this suggestion 😄

2. Remove types and fields from the monolith schema.
3. Delete unneeded resolvers from the monolith.
4. Remove `@override` directives from the subgraph.
5. Remove `@shareable` from types and fields in the subgraph when appropriate.

> ### 4. Repeat step 7 until you're done

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### 4. Migrate additional functionality out of the monolith as desired
```
